Are you paying attention?
Perhaps you’ve been asked that question
by your parents, a teacher,
or someone else in authority.
It’s a good question
for each of us to ask ourselves.
Can you think
of occasions associated with our worship
that require us to pay special attention?
For example, when reading the Bible,
attending meetings,
elders when shepherding,
you children
when being instructed by your parents.
We want to pay attention,
and yet there are so many distractions
—electronic gadgets,
the conversations and activities
of those around us.
Truly, it can be a challenge
to pay attention.
Did you know that the phrase “pay attention”
occurs dozens of times
in the New World Translation?
In many of those occurrences,
Jehovah is instructing his people
to pay attention.
What does it mean to “pay attention”?
And how important is it
that you and I pay attention to Jehovah?
The account in 1 Samuel chapter 15
will help us to answer those questions.
In verse 3, Jehovah instructs King Saul
to strike down the Amalekites
and to devote them
and everything they have to destruction.
However, verses 8 and 9 tell us
that Saul did not obey.
He spared the king of Amalek
and the best of the animals.
How did Saul respond
when Samuel confronted him?
As we read verses 13-15,
note how Saul tried to justify
his disobedience:
“When Samuel finally came to him,
“Saul said to him:
“‘May Jehovah bless you.
“I have carried out the word of Jehovah.’
“But Samuel said:
“‘Then what is this sound
of the flock in my ears
“and the sound of the cattle that I hear?’
“To this Saul said:
“‘They were brought from the Amalekites,
“‘because the people spared
the best of the flock and the herd
“‘for sacrificing them to Jehovah your God;
but what was left
we devoted to destruction.’”
Did you notice?
Saul attempted to justify his disobedience,
claiming that the animals
would be sacrificed to Jehovah.
Was Jehovah pleased with Saul?
As we read verse 22,
please note the connection
between paying attention
and obedience:
“Samuel then said:
“‘Does Jehovah take as much pleasure
in burnt offerings and sacrifices
“‘as in obeying the voice of Jehovah?
“‘Look!
“‘To obey is better than a sacrifice,
and to pay attention than the fat of rams.’”
What was one of the causes
of Saul’s disobedience?
He didn’t pay attention
to Jehovah’s instructions.
His failure to pay attention
resulted in disobedience
and brought Jehovah’s disapproval.
What a powerful lesson for us!
As happened with Saul,
our worship
could become unacceptable to Jehovah
if we fail to pay attention!
Now that we understand
why it is important to pay attention,
let’s consider
three aspects of paying attention
that are discussed in the Bible.
The first scripture we’ll consider
is 2 Chronicles 19:6:
“And he [Jehoshaphat] said to the judges:
“‘Pay attention to what you are doing,
“‘for you do not judge for man
but for Jehovah,
and he is with you when you pass judgment.’”
This admonition to “pay attention”
was given by King Jehoshaphat
to appointed judges
throughout the land of Judah.
What a sobering reminder!
Those judges had good reason
to pay attention to what they were doing.
Why?
They were responsible to Jehovah.
They represented him,
and their decisions
affected the lives of fellow worshippers.
Thus, they needed to be familiar
with Jehovah’s thinking on matters
and to hold to his unprejudiced viewpoint
when handling matters.
This is an excellent reminder
for those who serve as elders.
Good elders are good students of the Bible
and Bible-based publications.
Why?
Their attentiveness to Jehovah
enables them to pay attention
to what they are doing.
If they are going to represent Jehovah
and reflect his thinking accurately
as they handle matters
—whether they’re shepherding
the congregation,
delivering a part at a meeting,
caring for a challenging assignment,
or addressing wrongdoing
—they must pay attention
to what they are doing.
That is why they must be familiar
with Jehovah’s thinking
and then take care to follow his direction.
If they do, they show
that they are paying attention
to what they are doing.
Jehovah’s interest in assisting the elders
is demonstrated
in the ongoing education he provides.
Each time the circuit overseer
visits the congregation,
he presents material
prepared especially for the elders.
The Kingdom Ministry School
and the School for Congregation Elders
provide more intensive instruction.
How important
that elders pay close attention to
and apply such instruction!
Their doing so protects,
not just themselves
but also fellow worshippers.
By paying attention, elders will be able
to convey direction
to the congregations accurately.
This can be especially important
if our worship is banned
or restricted
in the event of a natural disaster
or other catastrophic event.
This brings us
to the second aspect of paying attention
that we’ll consider.
Let’s read Luke 8:18:
“Therefore,
“pay attention to how you listen,
“for whoever has will be given more,
“but whoever does not have,
even what he imagines he has
will be taken away from him.”
What did Jesus mean when he said:
“Pay attention to how you listen”?
Those in Jesus’ audience in the first century
had the wonderful privilege
of hearing Jesus’ literal voice
as he instructed them.
Of course, we can’t hear
the voice of Jesus today,
but we can read his words
and learn of his actions
as revealed in the Gospel accounts.
In fact, we have many opportunities to listen
to Jehovah, Jesus,
“the faithful and discreet slave,”
the elders in our congregation,
our marriage mate,
and our children.
No wonder the Bible writer James stated
that “everyone must be quick to listen.”
Think about it:
If Saul had truly listened receptively
to Jehovah’s direction
regarding the Amalekites,
he would likely have grasped
the importance of the direction he received
and would have been motivated to obey.
However, his lack of attentiveness
led to disobedience
and Jehovah’s disapproval.
If we don’t pay attention to how we listen,
we could find ourselves becoming critical
or unappreciative
or even disobedient.
So as Jehovah instructs and directs us,
we need to think
about what we are being told,
ponder over its meaning,
mull it over in our mind
and, most important,
apply the instruction in our own lives.
If you’re a young person,
how can you show that you’re paying attention
to how you listen?
Consider the admonition
at Ephesians 6:1-3:
“Children, be obedient to your parents
“in union with the Lord,
“for this is righteous.
“‘Honor your father and your mother’
“is the first command with a promise:
“‘That it may go well with you
and you may remain a long time
on the earth.’”
You children, who do you think
is the source of this direction?
We know that these words come from Jehovah.
Did you notice that the verses state not only
that children
should “be obedient” to their parents
but also that they should
“honor” their parents?
How can you show that you’re paying attention
to how you listen to this direction?
When I was a boy, I can remember occasions
when my parents would ask me
to do something,
perhaps to take out the trash.
I would always obey.
But at times, I’d make it very clear
that I didn’t really want to do
what was asked.
I think you young ones know what I mean.
However, if we’re truly paying attention
to how we listen to Jehovah’s words,
we’ll be careful to honor our parents,
which is an essential element of obedience.
In this way, we contribute
to the peace of the family,
and we make Jehovah’s heart glad.
Additionally,
as the promise in verse 3 indicates,
paying attention to how you listen
will protect you
and contribute to your success in other ways
throughout your adult life.
Of course, all of us should remember
that our everlasting welfare will depend
on our willingness to listen and obey.
How important, then, that all of us
pay attention to how we listen.
The third aspect of paying attention is found
at Luke 21:34, 35:
“But pay attention to yourselves
“that your hearts never become weighed down
“with overeating and heavy drinking
“and anxieties of life,
and suddenly that day
be instantly upon you as a snare.”
When Jesus admonished his followers
to pay attention to themselves,
he didn’t have in mind the selfish thinking
that characterized King Saul
and that’s so common, even encouraged,
in today’s world.
Rather, Jesus’ words reveal
that the key to paying attention to ourselves
is knowing ourselves
—knowing what’s in our figurative heart.
This is a challenge for all of us.
Why?
The Bible explains at Jeremiah 17:9:
“The heart is more treacherous
than anything else
“and is desperate.
Who can know it?”
Verse 10 answers:
“I, Jehovah, am searching the heart,
examining the innermost thoughts.”
So Jehovah knows what is in our heart,
and he can help us to know.
He can help us to examine
our motives and goals
and to discern why we do certain things.
Carefully and honestly looking at ourselves
in the mirror of God’s Word
can reveal areas in our thinking, words,
and actions
that need attention.
For example, some of Jehovah’s people
—including those of retirement age
who have enjoyed
very comfortable circumstances—
have concluded that they needed to make
adjustments in their lifestyle,
simplifying their lives
so that they can serve Jehovah more fully.
Some who have done so have had the privilege
of attending
the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
Although it meant
stepping out of their comfort zone,
perhaps moving to a new congregation,
they’ve experienced Jehovah’s blessing
in ways that they couldn’t have anticipated
as they share
the benefits of their experience
and theocratic education
in their new assignments.
How grateful we are
that Jehovah is providing ongoing,
life-saving instruction
by means of his Word and organization.
May each of us be determined
to “pay attention”
to what we are doing,
to how we listen,
and to ourselves.
By doing so, we’ll avoid falling
into the trap of disobedience
as King Saul did.
Instead, as attentive and obedient servants,
we’ll enjoy Jehovah’s friendship forever.